Introduction

 
Civil Engineering is the art and science of designing the infrastructure of a modern Civilized society. These engineers are concerned with the construction of roads, dams, bridges, power plants, irrigation projects, transport system, sewage disposal plants, oilrigs etc. These engineers are entrusted with the task of utilizing the natural resources judiciously and improve the life styles of the people.

Job Prospects
With the increase in urbanization and townships the job opportunities are also on rise for these engineers. It is estimated that we in India require25 million additional dwelling units. Only 30% of the villages in India are connected thorugh the roads. So it is obvious that civil engineers would not face a dearth of employment. These engineers can get job offers from high profile national and international engineering projects. China's Three Gorges Dam, London's new Wembley stadium and the new Antarctic research station are the recent examples, which show the engineering marvels of the civil engineers. They can also work with companies undertaking construction projects, such as Larsen and Toubro, BHEL, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation and others. Those looking to specialize in the construction industry can specialize in the area of construction management Civil engineers can work as:

Structural Engineers they design steel, concrete, or timber framed structures such as tall buildings, bridges, dams, towers, platforms, retaining walls, foundations and stadiums.
Waste Treatment Engineers they are trained to design and analyze waste treatment plants which can be industrial waste treatment facilities or sanitary waste treatment facility or potable water treatment facility.
Transportation Engineers they design and analyze Highways, Railways, Airports, Urban and Suburban Road Networks, Parking Lots, and Traffic Control Signal Systems.
Geotechnical Engineers they study about the subterranean rock and soil to determine its suitability to support extreme loads so that the structures, which are erected, are safe and secure.
Water Management Engineers they help in designing the drainage systems detention/retention ponds, navigational waterways, and flood control systems after studying the hydrologic and hydraulic principles.
Construction Managers they review contracts, order materials, hire and schedule sub contractors. They are concerned with the quality control and see that the projects get successfully completed within the specific time and specified budget.
For holding of a gazetted post in government one needs to clear the Engineering Service Examinations, which are held annually by the U.P.S.C or S.P.S.C.

Personality
See Engineering - Personality

Eligibility
See Engineering - Eligibility

Professional Courses
The civil engineering course includes all basic engineering sciences. The curriculum includes subjects like hydraulics, structures, irrigation engineering, foundation, construction etc. the post graduate courses emphasize on giving the students practical knowledge in structural engineering, environmental engineering and flood control management.

The National Institute of Construction Management and Research in Hyderabad, Gurgaon and Pune offers a Postgraduate Diploma in Construction Management, suitable for graduate engineers, as also a programme in Real Estate Development and Management. At graduation level the courses available at universities are B.Tech and B.E and at the post graduate level the courses available are M.Tech and M.E. many diploma courses in civil engineering are also available from various polytechnics.

Colleges, Institutions and Universities
See Engineering - Institutes

Specialization
One can do M.Tech or Ph.D or research work in structural engineering, water resource engineering, stress analysis, and engineering geology. Other research areas include

Applied environmental microbiology
Environmental impact assessment
Bio-solids management
Natural attenuation
Soil remediation
Waste management
Water and wastewater treatment
Remunerations