Introduction

 
Man, by nature, has never been satisfied by sitting at one place and never been contended by confining his whole life to his place of birth. So traveling is a natural instinct of man since times immemorial.

India is a vast country with diverse cultures and traditions. Our country offers a great attraction for those who crave to know about the splendor and magnificence of one of the oldest civilizations of the world and for its scenic beauty, right from Himalayas to Kanyakumari and from Gujrat to Arunachal Pradesh. We also have a stable political government which a pre-requisite to promote tourism and we are famous for our hospitality all of which makes the traveling experiences of the tourist far more memorable.

With the increasing globalization and opening of our economy to the world, travel and tourism in India is getting a great impetus. It is of the major upcoming industries, which has a great potential for growth along with earning a huge amount of foreign exchange for the country. This industry provides large number of jobs in diverse areas through its various related fields.

Personality
If you want to pursue Travel & Tourism as your career, you need to be friendly in nature and should carry an outgoing personality. You need to be fluent in English and able to communicate well with people. You should be able to take decisions and must be good in problem solving without getting panicky. Besides this you should be able to work in teams. You should have complete knowledge of the facilities available in an area along with the knowledge of your country and its customs and traditions. You should be adventurous by nature and should have a knack of management and administration.

Eligibility
To pursue courses at undergraduate level one must have passed higher secondary (10+2) examination. For a post-graduate degree, one needs to be graduate in any discipline with 50% marks for General category and 45% marks for SC/ST candidates and needs to clear the entrance test and group discussions and interviews which are conducted by the Directorate and Department of Tourism. One who is proficient in any foreign language is preferred. Many courses are available through Distance-Learning mode of education also. One who wants to do a Certificate course has to hold a 10+2 pass certificate.

Duration of these courses vary from one year to two years depending on the kind of course one prefers. Certificate courses are of less than a year.

Professional Courses
Following courses are available for those who are interested in this field:

Masters in Tourism administration (MTA)
Post Graduate Diploma in Tourism Management (PGDTM)
M.A in Tourism ( Benaras Hindu University)
Post Graduate Diploma in Tourism (PGDT)
Post Graduate Diploma in Travel and tourism Industry Management (PDDTTM)
Diploma in Destination Management
Diploma in Airlines
Diploma in Cargo Operations and Management
Colleges, Institutions and Universities
Various institutes and universities offering courses on travel and tourism are:

Sri Krishnadevaraya University Anantapur-03 ( A.P.) offers Masters in Tourism
Dravidian University Kuppam(A.P) offers P.G Diploma in Travel Management
National Institute of Tourism and Hospitality Management 1 st floor. SGM MALL, Mehdipatnam, Hydrabad (A.P) offers M.B.A Tourism and Hospitality(2 yrs)
Tezpur University Assam offers PG in Tourism Management
Institute of Tourism and Future Management, Chandigarh offers M.B.A Tourism (1 yr)
Sri Krishandev University Anantpur (A.P ) offer Masters in Business Administration in Tourism and Hospitality
Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management, 9Nyaya Marg, Chanakya Puri, Delhi offering short term course in Travel Agency and Tour Operation Management.
Skyline Business School, Huaz Khas Enclave, New Delhi offering Graduate and P.G Diploma courses Travel and Tourism Management.
Sri Venkateshwra College, University of Delhi, South Campus offers PG certificate course in Travel and Tourism Management.
YWCA of Delhi Women's Training Institute Bangla Sahib Lane ,Delhi offers PG Courses in Travel and Tourism Management.
Ashok Institute of Hospitality and Tourism, Qutab Institutional Area, New Delhi offers PG Diploma in Tourism/ Publicity/PR (1yrs)
College of Vocational Studies, University of Delhi offers 2 yr P.G and part time Diploma Course in Tourism.
Career Prospects
The World Travel and Tourism Council has given an estimate that more than 250 million tourist visiting India per annum. From these mounting figures we can make an assessment that this industry shows a tremendous scope of growth. People are coming here for enjoying their holidays, pilgrimages, for business tours and more recently for medical treatment. One who joins the industry, can work in the following areas:

Tourism department

One can work in Reservation and counter staff or as tour planners and tour guides in this department. Many administrative officers are also needed here who have to work for the development of tourism and its promotional activities. There are information assistants who provide the tourist with the information of different tourists spots and the kind of facilities available for them at those places.

Airlines

One can work as ground staff in reservation and counter areas. Those who look for more glamorous and challenging jobs can opt for the posts of Air-Hostess, Flight Pursers, Sales and Marketing staff and Customer Services. Airlines offer a good pay package along with many other incentives like free tickets to the staff and their families and many other incentives and benefits.

Tour operators

These are the people who turn a dream holiday of a tourist to a reality. They manage and conduct tours to various places and make arrangements even for Sport activities like Trekking, Rock Climbing, River Rafting, Para Gliding etc.

Travel agencies

One can find the job of a Travel Agent, Tour Escorts or in Marketing Staff or can open up their Own Travel Agency or a Cargo agency. Such agencies cater to the needs of the businessmen or other tourists who come for pleasure trips by providing them with adequate travel and living arrangements. Besides this one can handle the work of Accounts or work as a part of Sales & Marketing or Managerial staff in such agencies.

Remunerations
The basic salary structure and pay scales vary from Company-to-Company and from Department-to-Department.

Counter Clerk: Rs. 1500-2000
Assistant: Rs. 2000-2500
Junior Executive: Rs.3000-3500
Regional Manager: Rs.3800-4500
General Manager: Rs.5000-6000
Air Hostess: Rs. 6000 basic salary for Domestic to Rs 40000 in International Airlines
Guides: They may charge from Rs. 400 and above for an eight hours a day. They may earn between Rs. 30000 to Rs. 40000 in three or four months period time of peak tourist season