Fresh Out of College?

Fresher and no job from campus? It is not a very comfortable situation to be in. You spent a fortune trying to acquire the professional degree, and worked very hard to earn that degree. The reward for all your efforts will follow, but one needs to be a little patient and work towards it. Getting depressed about the fact is not going to help.

First and foremost requirement is to probe oneself. What skills did you lack to get that dream job from the campus itself? Go, work to acquire those skills. Improve your command over the language, your confidence and brush up your presentation skills.

If not sufficient companies or no companies came to hire from your college, don't get disappointed, its time to approach them directly. Identify and make a list of companies of your choice. Find out the skills they would be looking for and do you have those skills? Find out the business of the company and identify how both you and the company can benefit from each other. Every job aspirant must be approaching them, so how to make yourself stand apart from the rest?

First impression is always from your résumé and the covering letter attached. Always send a neatly typed biodata. Don't know what to write in your résumé? Emphasize your objective for your career choice, your expertise area, your achievements and leave all the personal details towards the end. As a fresher you may attach details of the specialized courses you attended, any specialized training attended and achievements. In the covering letter, you may mention briefly your skills and the position you are applying for.

Try to speak to the HR personnel of the companies and give your résumé directly to them, explaining why you want to work with the company. Follow up with the company. Not all freshers recruited from campus join them and some vacancies may still exist. Following up may help get a job.

The best practice is not to wait to graduate, to start looking for a job, but eight to twelve months before graduating. Most companies come for campus recruitment in the final year and that's the time one should start gearing up for a job and approaching prospective employers.

Your efforts will definitely pay up. Don't get disheartened and work towards your goal.