
Photogallery: 21st HT Shine HR Conclave - Gurgaon Chapter
Monday, September 29, 2014
1 81

Organisations today need to re - adapt themselves to fit in to the needs & aspirations of the millennial workforce, if it wants to harness their capabilities & build the world of tomorrow. HR experts led the discussion on this topic at the conclave. Read more
5 nerve wrecking co workers you’ll find in every office
5 nerve wrecking co workers you’ll find in every office
Wednesday, September 24, 2014 , Written by Anasua Chakraborty
0 99

We've all had coworkers who just rub us the wrong way. They have the world’s most annoying habits that get under our skin. Here are the most common office caricatures you’ll easily relate to. Read more
6 most common types of bosses and ways to deal with them
6 most common types of bosses and ways to deal with them
Tuesday, September 09, 2014 , Written by Anasua Chakraborty
4 208

Learning how to deal or manage your boss is a significant and transferable skill, and will definitely decide how far you progress. Read more
Wow Workplace: Facebook allows employees to fail
Wow Workplace: Facebook allows employees to fail
Monday, September 08, 2014 , Written by Shailja Shah Purohit
3 113

Facebook is defined by its hack culture - an environment that rewards creative problem solving, rapid decision making and keeps employees motivated by the message of ‘Fail harder’. A visual walk through its premises. Read more
5 Don’ts when requesting a raise
5 Don’ts when requesting a raise
Monday, September 01, 2014 , Written by Steffi Joseph
8 194

Looking for a salary raise? You need to evaluate your performance and present them to your employer in a manner that makes him realize your worth. While people try different tactics there are a few things should be avoided. Read more
7 Reasons why your co-workers hate you
7 Reasons why your co-workers hate you
Friday, August 29, 2014 , Written by Steffi Joseph
19 388

Not everyone gets along with the people they work with. Are you having trouble with your colleagues and don’t know why. Well, here is a list of why your co-workers may hate you. Read more
7 Personality traits that will get you hired
7 Personality traits that will get you hired
Friday, August 22, 2014 , Written by Steffi Joseph
5 735

When equally qualified people apply for a job, it takes a little more than just skills to impress a prospect employer. Mentioned below are personality traits that employers look for in a candidate. Read more
